



Network Working Group                                        D. Schinazi
Internet-Draft                                                Google LLC
Updates: 2418 (if approved)                             18 December 2024
Intended status: Best Current Practice                                  
Expires: 21 June 2025


                        An Update on Milestones
               draft-schinazi-update-on-milestones-latest

Abstract

   As mandated in RFC 2418, working group charters currently contain
   milestones.  However, these milestones are often sufficiently out of
   date that they no longer provide value.  This document makes
   milestones optional and allows more discretion on their dates.  It
   updates RFC 2418.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://davidschinazi.github.io/draft-schinazi-update-on-milestones/
   draft-schinazi-update-on-milestones.html.  Status information for
   this document may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
   schinazi-update-on-milestones/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/DavidSchinazi/draft-schinazi-update-on-milestones.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 21 June 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Conventions and Definitions
   2.  Prior Text
   3.  Issues
   4.  Update
     4.1.  Optionality of Milestones
     4.2.  Optionality of Dates
     4.3.  Granularity of Dates
     4.4.  Date Management
     4.5.  Ownership
     4.6.  Guidance for Chairs
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Alternatives Considered
     A.1.  Do Nothing
     A.2.  Ensure Chairs Update Milestones
     A.3.  Improve Tooling to Automate Milestones
     A.4.  Remove Milestones Entirely
     A.5.  Rewrite RFC 2418
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   As mandated in Section 2.2 of [RFC2418], a working group charter
   "enumerates a set of milestones together with time frames for their
   completion".  That document also leans heavily on milestones as a
   process mechanism that dictates how a working group spends its time
   and conducts its business.  However, more than 25 years after the
   publication of that document, the reality is often different.
   Milestones are now commonly ignored, and often insufficiently updated
   to the point of irrelevance.  Since 2020, it has been possible for
   some working groups to use dateless milestones (see [DATELESS]).
   Since current usage has diverged significantly from the requirements
   mandated by [RFC2418], we update that document to better match how
   the IETF now operates.  Making milestones optional allows removing
   them from working groups that would otherwise perpetually have out-
   of-date milestones, while retaining them when the chairs do keep them
   up-to-date.

1.1.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  Prior Text

   At the time of writing this document, the current normative language
   around milestones is in Section 2.2 of [RFC2418]:

      The working group charter MUST establish a timetable for specific
      work items.  While this may be renegotiated over time, the list of
      milestones and dates facilitates the Area Director's tracking of
      working group progress and status, and it is indispensable to
      potential participants identifying the critical moments for input.
      Milestones shall consist of deliverables that can be qualified as
      showing specific achievement; e.g., "Internet-Draft finished" is
      fine, but "discuss via email" is not.  It is helpful to specify
      milestones for every 3-6 months, so that progress can be gauged
      easily.  This milestone list is expected to be updated
      periodically (see Section 5 of [RFC2418]).

3.  Issues

   Milestones were designed as a tool to share information from the
   corresponding working group to various interested parties.  When
   milestones are years out of date, they can no longer serve that
   purpose.  They can also cause harm if someone interprets them as
   being timely when they are in fact out of date.

   Additionally, the current datatracker tooling that allows dateless
   milestones appears to be in violation of the RFC 2418 text quoted
   above.  While this is not a critical issue in and of itself, it helps
   motivate updating RFC 2418.

4.  Update

   This documents updates the guidance in RFC 2418 in the following
   ways.

4.1.  Optionality of Milestones

   Milestones are now optional, on a per-working-group basis.  During
   chartering, new working groups can now begin existence without
   milestones.  Once a working group is chartered, milestones can be
   enabled or disabled without rechartering.

4.2.  Optionality of Dates

   In RFC 2418, milestones were associated with dates.  In 2020, the
   IESG ran an experiment that removed dates from milestones from some
   working groups.  This practice is now officially supported.  When a
   new working group is chartered, its milestones can be dated or
   dateless.  After chartering, changing whether dates are enabled does
   not require rechartering.

4.3.  Granularity of Dates

   Milestones can carry dates, and those dates have a granularity.
   Commonly, the dates have the granularity of a month.  Other
   granularities are possible, such as a quarter, a half-year, or an
   IETF meeting.  New granularities can be chosen by the IESG without
   updating this document.

4.4.  Date Management

   For each working group that has enabled dated milestones, the dates
   can be configured to be modifiable either by the chairs, or by the
   area director.  This allows the area director to trust the chairs to
   update dates without approval in those cases.  The decision of who
   manages change control for the dates lies with the responsible area
   director.

4.5.  Ownership

   As was the case in RFC 2418, changes to milestones are subject to
   IESG approval.  In particular, whether a specific working group uses
   milestones, whether they have dates, and the granularity of those
   dates, is a decision made by the Area Director responsible for that
   working group.  Once made, these decisions need to be posted to the
   mailing list of the corresponding working group.

   The Area Director is encouraged to discuss these choices with the
   working group chairs, as the success of milestones is predicated on
   the chairs updating them in a timely manner.  While it is expected
   that this decision will almost always be made as agreement between
   working group chairs and their responsible area director, in the case
   of a disagreement the final decision lies with the area director.

4.6.  Guidance for Chairs

   For working groups where milestones are enabled, chairs are expected
   to keep milestones up to date.  Chairs are expected to review
   milestones at least once per IETF meeting (every four months) to
   ensure they are accurate.

5.  Security Considerations

   Readers of the datatracker REALLY SHOULD NOT make important decisions
   based solely on the status of working group milestones as those could
   be out of date.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC2418]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and
              Procedures", BCP 25, RFC 2418, DOI 10.17487/RFC2418,
              September 1998, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2418>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [DATELESS] "wg-chairs list discussion: Milestones and dates",
              <https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/wgchairs/
              GKTCAy5As7czqteM-MlhqIvL2Ig/>.

Appendix A.  Alternatives Considered

   During discussions around this document, the following alternatives
   were considered.

A.1.  Do Nothing

   As is often the case, the simplest path forward is to do nothing at
   all.  It has the advantage of requiring the least work, but the
   obvious downside of not addressing the issues described in Section 3.

A.2.  Ensure Chairs Update Milestones

   One potential solution to the issue of out of date milestones is,
   unsurprisingly, to update the milestones often enough.  This solution
   has the advantage of not requiring community consensus to update RFC
   2418.  Since working chairs serve at the discretion of the Area
   Director, it is absolutely within the area directors' mandate to
   request that chairs update milestones.  However, since chairs are a
   volunteer unpaid position, they might not always have the time to
   fulfill all the tasks requested by their responsible area director.
   The benefits of up-to-date milestones would need to demonstrated in
   order to motivate their use.

A.3.  Improve Tooling to Automate Milestones

   The overwhelming majority of milestones currently on the datatracker
   are specific to a given draft.  The datatracker even includes tooling
   that allows attaching a draft to a milestone as an "associated
   document".  This tooling could be enhanced to automatically update
   the milestone based on the status of the corresponding document.
   However, this raises the question: if the relevant information is
   already available in the datatracker, what is the purpose of
   duplicating it in a milestone?

A.4.  Remove Milestones Entirely

   Another more drastic option would be to remove milestones entirely
   from the datatracker, and update RFC 2418 to no longer mention them.

A.5.  Rewrite RFC 2418

   During the 25 years that have gone by since RFC 2418 was published,
   many aspects of the IETF process have changed.  At this point, some
   portions of RFC 2418 now feel anachronistic.  As a random example,
   working group minutes are theoretically required to be encoded in
   ASCII, and that almost never happens any more in order to allow using
   the names of working group members that require different character
   sets.  Similarly, RFC 2418 still requires chairs to circulate an
   attendance list (also known as the "blue sheets"), a task that has
   now been automated.

   While such small points do help motivate updating RFC 2418, it is
   unclear if much larger changes would be beneficial.

Acknowledgments

   Some of the contents of this document were inspired by a presentation
   given by Adam Roach at the WG Chairs’ Forum at IETF 103 in November
   2018.  The author would like to thank everyone who commented on the
   various email discussions about this topic.

Author's Address

   David Schinazi
   Google LLC
   1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
   Mountain View, CA 94043
   United States of America
   Email: dschinazi.ietf@gmail.com
